# C++ Tutorial  
## What is C++  
C++ is an object oriented, functional and procedural programming language. Some of its common aspects are:  
1. Great level of flexibility and features: C++ is very flexible, and can work at a very low level as well as a very high level, which is why it is commonly used along with C in building operating system kernels. Also, modern versions of C++ have improved it a lot, with additional features like anonymous functions, multithreading, regular expressions, initializer lists, tuples, partial support for duck typing(`std::any`, `std::variant`, `std::optional`), automatic type deduction (`auto`, `decltype(auto)`), smart pointers and so on. C++ is directly compiled to native binary code, and so it adds to security of the application (binary executables are more difficult to reverse engineer), and also performance. It can also use static(`.o` and `.a` (Linux and Windows(GCC-based)) `.lib` (Windows(MSVC))) and dynamic(`.so` (Linux) and `.dll` (Windows)) libraries which are there in binary format.
2. Compatibility with C: C++ is highly compatible with C and so many libraries built for C also work with C++ with very less or sometimes no change in source code. There are very few cases where C++ is not compatible with C.  
3. Huge community: C++ has a huge community and therefore has many libraries to help programming in it (some of which are built in C, but they work with C++ on linking (and even with source in most cases)), common ones of them may be Boost and Abseil for general purpose utility, SFML and Allegro for 2D graphics and multimedia, Godot, Irrlicht, Ogre, Lumberyard(Windows-specific), CryEngine(Windows-specific), Unreal(asks a small royalty for a huge commercial use) etc. for 3D graphics, wxWidgets, FLTK, nana, Ultimate++, GLFW, FreeGLUT etc. for GUI (game-centric for GLFW, OpenGL-centric for FreeGLUT, any GUI for others) and OpenGL context, OpenAL soft, irrKlang(permits only noncommercial use for free) etc. for Audio files, Bullet and Box2D for physics, GLM etc. for mathematics, Magick++, STB etc. for image loading, OpenCL, OpenGL, OpenCV, OpenXR, OpenMAX, Vulkan, CUDA(NVIDIA-specific), DirectX(Windows-specific), Metal(MacOS-specific), OS Native APIs etc. for hardware acceleration, sockets(used for networkig) and other low level programming etc.. There is an even bigger list of them, and even more categories on cppreference.  
4. Interoperability with many other programming languages: Java is made in C++, and can be used with C++ through Java Native Interface, and Python is written in C, but it can be used with C++ also, through libraries like `pythonXY.lib`, `_tkinter.lib` etc. and headers like `python.h` which come with the installation. Python also has Cython and modules like `ctypes` which help integrate C++ and Python. (Warning: Python does not work with GCC on Windows since it only provides MSVC libraries. MSYS2 has made a package for Python support in MinGW64, but it only provides dynamic library, and no static library.) Other Python and Java, C++ is indirectly compatible with all programming languages C is with, though using C++ libraries may not so straightforward.  
5. Rapid Evolution: From C++11 of 2011, C++ is evolving pretty fast, with revisions every 3 years, each revision adding dozens of new features. C++11 added anonymous functions, template argument deduction for functions, runtime type inference, threading, tuples, compile time constants, scoped enumerations, unordered containers, regular expressions, user defined string literals, unicode (UTF-16 and UTF-32) strings etc. C++14 added binary literals, automatic return type deduction, variable templates etc. C++17 further added template argument deduction for classes, partial support for duck typing, readonly strings, UTF8 string literals etc. There is also C++20, which adds even more features but most of its features are yet to be supported by many compilers (only latest versions of GCC, Clang and MSVC support majority of them).  
## Common Uses of C++  
1. Games, Simulators and Other High Performance Graphics: Maya 3D etc.  
2. Operating System Kernels: Windows, MacOS etc.
3. Finance and Banking Applications: Bloomberg, Infosys Finacle etc.  
4. Web Browsers: Firefox, Chrome, Internet Explorer etc.  
5. Machine Learning and Artificial iItelligence: Tensoflow etc.  
6. GUI Applications: Microsoft Office, Libreoffice, Adobe Photoshop & Illustrator etc.  
7. Video Processing: Spotify, Youtube (video processing backend), Windows Amp Media Player etc. 
8. Embedded Systems   
9. Database Management Software: MySQL etc.  
10. Compilers and Interpreters: GCC, Clang, MSVC, CPython, Java etc.  
11. IDES: Visual Studio, Code::Blocks, CodeLite, RStudio etc.  
## Requirements for this Tutorial  
* GCC-Based Compiler which supports at least most of the features of C++17: The steps are not written here since there will be different steps required for different platforms. GCC is inbuilt in Linux with C++. In case it is not use `sudo apt install build-essential` for Debian-based systems, and maybe a relevant package manager for other distributions. For Windows, MinGW32, MinGW-w64 or Cygwin or Cygwin32 is available. For MinGW32, there is a direct install from sourceforge. For MinGW-w64, either directly download the build from MinGW-w64 sourceforge (not recommended, since it gives an older version of GCC), or download MSYS2 and use `pacman` to download MinGW-w64 x86_64 (MINGW64) or MinGW-w64 UCRT x86_64 (UCRT64) The only difference between these is that the second one uses Universal C Runtime, which is a newer C Runtime added in Windows 10, supporting C11 and C17, while the first one uses `msvcrt.dll`, which does not even have complete support for C99, but is used with hacks to add newer C features and support for some POSIX APIs, and Cygwin links to a POSIX emulation layer named `cygwin1.dll` (unless that using the flag `-mno-cygwin` is used prior to GCC 4.7) (if using `cygwin-mingw` cross compiler after version 4.7). GCC is also available on MacOS, through some possibly tedious way. Any other compiler is OK as long as you know how to compile with it and that compiler supports modern C++ (Clang and MSVC(Windows) also are almost up to date with latest standards with Intel C++, Apple Clang(MacOS) and Nvidia HPC C++ catching up).  
* Text editor: View a blog on it here and choose yourself. IDE should not be required for now (they will in fact be a burden and will be laggy), but still if anybody wants, there are options available like Code::Blocks, CodeLite, Eclipse, Qt Creator, Visual Studio(Windows-only, proprietary), Xcode(MacOS-only, proprietary), CLion(paid proprietary) etc.  
* Not for this tutorial, but to continue further and try out libraries, a package manager (Chocolatey(?), scoop(?), winget(?), MSYS2 pacman etc. for Windows, Local package manager, snap(?), flatpak(?) etc. for Linux, homebrew for MacOS) and a build tool (CMake etc.) may be required.
## Hello World  
First let us see the program.  
```c++
#include <iostream>

int main() {
    std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```  
* The first line here is `#include <iostream>`. `iostream` is a standard library header file located in the C++ include directory of the compiler, which is why it is covered in angular brackets. It contains functions and macros for console I/O. `#include` is a preprocessor directive (to be explained in some later tutorial), which copies the contents of that file into the program, in this case, all the functions, variables, classes, macros etc. located in `iostream` header.  
* `int main()` is the function to be executed when the program runs. (Warning: Unlike C, do not use `void` as the return type, since it is removed from C++. The compiler will give an error `"main()" must return "int".`.)  
* `std::cout` is the `std::ostream` object in `iostream` used for displaying output in the console. `<<` is the operator used to write to a `std::ostream`. Various types of `std::ostream`s will be seen is some later tutorial. `std::endl` is a puts the newline character, which is very similar to `\n`(newline character), only that it helps somewhat it garbage collection, for displaying the output immediately. The exact equivalent of it is `std::cout << "\n" << std::flush;`.  
* `std` is the namespace in which most of the standard library commands exist. To access them we use the scope resolution operator `::`, which is similar to `.` in C# (have no experience with it, but have read it), when used to access namespaces. A `using namespace std;` declaration can also be put at the top, but it is not recommended.  
* `return 0` is the value the function returns. This won't matter much, at least for now.  
## Compilation Process  
There are various steps taken to compile C++.  
### Lexer and Parser  
A lexer is a program which breaks the source and classifies it into tokens. For example, `if` may be converted to a token denoting it, numbers may be converted to the token denoting numbers and so on. A parser is which validates the input, and will throw errors in syntax and semantics. GCC uses Bison LR parser. Clang uses its own parser.  
### Preprocessor  
A preprocessor is what processes macros into code. This is where header files are included and macros are processed. For example, in C++, defining `#define S(x) #x` defines a macro S which will stringify whatever is given as an argument, like if we call `S(std::cout)` it will be replaced with `"std::cout"`. Conditional compilation is suppported by macros.  
### Compiler  
A compiler is what translates source into machine code. This is where our program is almost ready, since here functions and variables are translated to bytes.  
### Linker  
Now the only thing our program lacks is definitions of functions which are not there in our program. We use the C++ standard library for almost every backend and console based thing we do in C++. So here the standard libraries are linked. We often use the native APIs in some form (Win32 API for Windows, X11 and XCB for Linux (except if Wayland is used), Cocoa and AppKit for MacOS) for rendering graphics, audio and text based output. We sometimes also need APIs like OpenGL, Vulkan, OpenMAX etc. We link their libraries too if we wish such output. GCC uses ld as its linker and libstdc++ and libgcc as its C++ and C standard libraries respectively. To do only the compilation stage and not proceding to the linker, we use `-c` option in GCC. This helps us if we want to use other standard libraries. Clang uses lld as its linker. It does not ship with its own library, and instead relies on other standard libraries like libstdc++, libc++, MSVC STL etc. GCC also links to `msvcrt.dll` on Windows (if MinGW32 or MinGW64, `ucrt.dll` for UCRT64) and LGPL licensed glibc on Linux because they are the runtimes which provide these functions.  
## Run the Program  
Let the name of your program be `filename.cpp`, and let the target file name be `executable.exe`. Then to compile, type this in your terminal.  
```bat
g++ filename.cpp -o executable.exe
```  
or, to statically link libgcc and libstdc++
```bat
g++ filename.cpp -o executable.exe -static-libstdc++ -static-libgcc
```  
If executable name is not specified, like typing only `g++ filename.cpp`, then the resulting executable will be named `a.out` on Linux and `a.exe` on Wihdows. To run this file, type the first command on powershell style terminal (Windows powershell(Windows only), command prompt(Windows only), powershell core etc.) and second one on bash style terminal(Linux terminal(Linux only), MacOS terminal(MacOS only), Git bash, MSYS2 Bash(Windows only) etc.).  
```bat
executable.exe
```  
```bat
./executable.exe
```  
## FAQ  
### Does GCC allow compilation of non-GPL programs?  
Yes, GPL-licensed programs allow compilation of non-GPL programs. A notable example is Blender. Also, though libgcc and libstdc++ are licensed GPL, which does not allow linking of non-GPL programs, there is a special exception clause put in the license allowing non-GPL programs to be linked dynamically or statically.  
### Is MinGW-w64 suitable for GUI and Graphics apps?  
Yes, MinGW-w64 or any good GCC for Windows is perfectly suitable for GUI apps, and in fact, when installed with MSYS2 (MINGW32, MINGW64 or UCRT64), many popular GUI libraries like wxWidgets and FLTK can be installed with pacman. It is also very good for graphics apps using OpenGL. For MINGW64, just install `mingw-w64-x86_64-glew` and `mingw-w64-x86_64-freeglut`(or `mingw-w64-x86_64-glfw`) and optionally `mingw-w64-x86_64-glm` and you are set. For other GCC versions for Windows, you can build them yourself with CMake in very easy steps. Replace `x86_64` with `i686` for MINGW32 and `ucrt-x86_64` for UCRT64. MinGW has capabilities to use Direct3D, but maybe MSVC is better in this case.  
### How different is C++ from Objective C?  
C++ and Objective C are completely different programming languages. C++ usually has lots of choices for a compiler for every major, and maybe even minor plaforms. Whereas Objective C has very few compilers. C++ is standardised by ISO, whereas Objective C is not standardised and has many implementations like Cocoa, GNUStep, Clang etc. Also, despite both of them supporting object oriented programming, C++ way is directly inspired from Simula, which has multiple inheritence, pass by reference (also encapsulation in a later version) etc. while Objective C way is directly inspired from Smalltalk, which has messaging, single inheritence, protocols etc. [See this third party website (it is a PDF) for more information about Simula and Smalltalk.](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/teaching/1011/ConceptsPL/SIMULA-Smalltalk.pdf).
<!-- ### Which good compilers are available for C++ for each platform?
|Platform|Compiler|
|-|-|
|Ubuntu 22.04 LTS|GCC 9-12<br>GCC 11 (default)<br>Clang 11-14<br>Clang 14 (default)|
|Ubuntu 20.04 LTS|GCC 7-10<br>GCC 9 (default)<br>GCC 11-12 (can be easily built)<br>Clang 6-10<br>Clang 10 (default)|
|Ubuntu 18.04 LTS|GCC 5-8<br>GCC 7 (default)<br>GCC 9-10 (PPA)<br>Clang 5-9<br>Clang 6 (default)|
|Windows 10, 11|Microsoft Visual Studio 2022<br>MSYS2 MinGW-w64 GCC 11.2|
-->
